Domain Transfer Learning for MCI Conversion
Prediction

Bo Cheng'"*, Daogiang Zhang'"*, and Dinggang Shen?

' Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China
2 Dept. of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599
{cb729,dqzhang}@nuaa.edu.cn, dgshen@med.unc.edu

Abstract. In recent studies of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), it has increasing
attentions in identifying mild cognitive impairment (MCI) converters (MCI-C)
from MCI non-converters (MCI-NC). Note that MCI is a prodromal stage of
AD, with possibility to convert to AD. Most traditional methods for MCI
conversion prediction learn information only from MCI subjects (including
MCLC and MCI-NC), not from other related subjects, ¢.g., AD and normal
controls (NC), which can actually aid the classification between MCI-C and
MCI-NC. In this paper, we propose a novel domain-transfer learning method
for MCI conversion prediction. Different from most existing methods, we
classify MCI-C and MCI-NC with aid from the domain knowledge learned with
AD and NC subjects as auxiliary domain to further improve the classification
performance. Our method contains two key components: (1) the cross-domain
kernel learning for transferring auxiliary domain knowledge, and (2) the
adapted support vector machine (SVM) decision function construction for
cross-domain and auxiliary domain knowledge fusion. Experimental results on
the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database show that
the proposed method can significantly improve the classification performance
between MCI-C and MCI-NC, with aid of domain knowledge learned from AD
and NC subjects.

1 Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in elderly people
worldwide. Early diagnosis of AD is very important for possible delay of the disease.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a prodromal stage of AD, which can be further
categorized into MCI converters (MCI-C) and MCI non-converters (MCI-NC). The
former will convert into AD in follow-up time, while the latter will not convert. Thus,
accurate diagnosis of MCI converters is of great importance. Nowadays, many
machine learning methods have been proposed for the classification of AD or MCI [1-
3]. More recently, an increasing number of studies in AD research begin to address
MCI conversion prediction, i.e., the classification between MCI-C and MCI-NC
based on the baseline imaging data [2-7].

One challenge in MCI conversion prediction is that the number of MCI (including
both MCI-C and MCI-NC) subjects available for training is generally very small and

N. Ayache et al. (Eds.): MICCAI 2012, Part I, LNCS 7510, pp. 82-90, 2012.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
