Modeling and Real-Time Simulation
of a Vascularized Liver Tissue

Igor Peterlik, Christian Duriez, and Stéphane Cotin

Inria

Abstract. In Europe only, about 100,000 deaths per year are related
to cirrhosis or liver cancer. While surgery remains the option that offers
the foremost success rate against such pathologies, several limitations
still hinder its widespread development. Among the limiting factors is
the lack of accurate planning systems, which has been a motivation for
several recent works, aiming at better resection planning and training
systems, relying on pre-operative imaging, anatomical and biomechanical
modelling. While the vascular network in the liver plays a key role in
defining the operative strategy, its influence at a biomechanical level has
not been taken into account.

In the paper we propose a real-time model of vascularized organs such

as the liver. The model takes into account separate constitutive laws for
the parenchyma and ves

els, and defines a coupling mechanism between
these two entities. In the evaluation section, we present results of in vitro

porcine liver experiments that indicate a significant influence of vascular
structures on the mechanical behaviour of tissue. We confirm the val-
ues obtained in the experiments by computer simulation using standard
FEM. Finally, we show that the conventional modelling approach can be
efficiently approximated with the proposed composite model capable of
real-time calculations.

1 Introduction

The liver is one of the major organs in the human body and is in charge of more
than a hundred vital functions. Because of its many functions, its pathologies
are varied, numerous and often lethal. The most advanced state of evolution of
these pathologies is cirrhosis or cancer, with nearly 100,000 related deaths in
2008. Surgical procedures remain the option that offers the best success rates
against such pathologies, with a 5-year survival rate above 50% for surgery. Yet,
surgery is not always performed due to several limitations, in particular the pre-
operative estimation of the liver volume remaining after resection. This volume

depends highly on the choice of the operative strategy as well as anatomical
constraints defined by the vascular network.

Such limitations could be overcome by improving the quality of the plan-
ning, which relies on a combination of components, mostly image processing and
biomechanical modelling. Several works have addressed this problem. A tool for

liver resection planning and training is described in [I] where a model of the liver
including the vascular system is reconstructed from CT data and visualized in a

N. Ayache et al. (Eds.): MICCAI 2012, Part I, LNCS 7510, pp. 50-57, 2012
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
